##MAPGD version 0.3

[<b>Download MAPGD.zip</b>](https://github.com/LynchLab/MAPGD/archive/master.zip) [(C) Michael Lynch](https://github.com/LynchLab/MAPGD#copyright)

[<b>Visit the MAPGD development page</b>](https://lynchlab.github.io/MAPGD/)

###Contents 
####[Introduction](https://github.com/LynchLab/MAPGD#-introduction-)
#####[FAQ](https://github.com/LynchLab/MAPGD#-faq-)
#####[Changes](https://github.com/LynchLab/MAPGD#-changes-)
####Basic Usage
#####[Commands](https://github.com/LynchLab/MAPGD#-commands-)
#####[Input/Output](https://github.com/LynchLab/MAPGD#-inputoutput-)
#####[Examples](https://github.com/LynchLab/MAPGD#-examples-)
#####[Linux or Mac users](https://github.com/LynchLab/MAPGD#-linux-or-mac-users-)
####Misc.
#####[Python extras](https://github.com/LynchLab/MAPGD#-python-extras-)
#####[Bigred2](https://github.com/LynchLab/MAPGD#-bigred2-)
#####[References](https://github.com/LynchLab/MAPGD#-references-)

<h3> Introduction </h3>

MAPGD is a series of related programs that estimate allele frequency, heterozygosity, Hardy-Weinberg disequilibrium and identity by descent (IBD) coefficients from population genomic data using statistically rigorous maximum likelihood approach. It is primarily useful for the analysis of low coverage population genomic data, and provides minimum MSE estimators of these statistics on low coverage sequence. Although other tools, such as vcftools, give similar allele frequency estimates with less computational investment when coverage is high, MAPGD should always be preferred to other programs when calculating IBD coefficients. 

<h5> FAQ </h5>

<b> Why don't you use a vcf format? </b>

We intend to implement read/writing in the vcf/bcf format as quickly as possible to increase the compatibility of our program with existing tools. 

<b> Why don't you provide information on indels? </b>

We currently do not have a likelihood model to account for errors in calling indels, so we cannot incorporate indels into our program at this time. This is on our TODO list, but may not occur for some time.

<b> How long does it take to run? </b>

Typical benchmarks with 16 threads on a 2.6 GHz put us at around 18,000 sites a second for 96 simulated individuals at 10x coverage. This means that the typical invertebrate population will take around three hours to analyze on a good computer, and a vertebrate genome might take a few days. If you have managed to sequence *Paris japonica* you're looking at three months of computation time. We are not currently focused on scaling our program up for larger genomes, however, if you want to analyze something like *japonica*, let us know and we will make MPS and CUDA priorities! 

<b> How can I help? </b>

We have lots to do, and need plenty of help! 

* Create an Issue. 

	If you have any problems at all using this code, please click the !Issues button on the right hand menu to make us aware of the problem. Whether you can't compile and run the program, or locate one of the plethora of typos in the documentation and help files, please let us know! 

* Write a script to evaluate the statistical performance of a command. 

	One of the most important task we have right now is to compare the performance of mapgd to other programs that are available and make sure that our program is as good as it can be. Whether it is comparison of computational efficiency or statistical accuracy, we need a script to assess it! 

* Anything you can think of!

If you can do any of these things (or anything else that you think might help), you can contribute to the project by typing:

	git clone https://github.com/LynchLab/MAPGD/

This will create a clone of the repository that you can play around with on your own. Then, if you can make some change that might help the project type:
	
	git pull origin

we will review the changes you have made and see how we can integrate them into the project. 

<h5> Changes </h5>

Changes to the interface have been made to better conform to [POSIX](http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/basedefs/V1_chap12.html) guidelines:
The the syntax of the -p option (which specifies the populations to be analyzed) has been changed from a space delimited list to a comma delimited list. See the -h option from more information.

The default behavior of the cp and ep commands bas been changed to read and write to the stdin and stdout (respectively).

The ability to specify input and output files with the -i and -o options may be deprecated in the near future. Because files within the program are unbuffered, reading and writing is quite slow and you will see significant gains in performance using i/o redirection. 

Headers have been added to .pro files to preserve information about input files and aid with compatibility as development continues. Additionally, the last line of .pro files now list the total number of lines in the file. 
 
All .pro files w/o headers are assumed to have been generated by the program “GFE” written by Takahiro-Maruki.

<h5> Commands </h5>

<b>The ep, cp and ei commands</b>: These commands use a maximum-likelihood (ML) procedure to estimate allele-frequencies from the numbers of the four nucleotides (quartets) observed at individual genomic sites. For each site, the major and minor nucleotides are identified, their frequencies are estimated by ML.

The ep (estimate-pooled) command estimates whether a site is significantly polymorphic within a population; The cp (compare-pooled) command estimates whether the frequency of major alleles at a site differ between two sample population; and the ei (estimate-individual) command estimates whether a site is significantly polymorphic within a population where individuals have been labeled before sequencing;

The designated major nucleotide is simply the one with the highest rank, and the minor nucleotide is the one with the second highest rank. If the top three ranks are all equal, the site is treated as unresolvable, with both major and minor nucleotides designated in the output by a \*.

If the second and third ranks are equal but lower than the major-nucleotide count, the site is treated as monomorphic, with the minor nucleotide again designated by a \*.

The ep and ei commands are useful to distinguish between sites that may appear polymorphic because of sequencing errors and sites that are truly polymorphic, and the cp command is useful to determine whether sampling and sequencing errors can explain differences in estimates of allele frequencies, or whether allele frequencies differ between population samples.

<b> The proview command </b>: A number of related file formats which we dub '.pro' file formats are accepted by mapgd.

<h5> Input/Output </h5>

<b> .pro files </b> The most basic input file is a plain text file consists of three tab delimited columns : The first column is an arbitrary string which identifier a genomic region (e.g., a scaffold), the second column is an integer number specifying the location of a site on that scaffold, and the final column contains four integer values separated by '/'s representing the number of times an A, C, G, and T was observed at the site (respectively). The string-integer pair must be unique.  

We call this file format the .pro file format. Files in this format can be generated from mpileup files (that have been made without the -s and -O options) using the command "mapgd proview" 

If more than one bam file was used in the construction of the mpileup file, then these files will each appear as additional columns in the .pro File. Additionally, if multiple .pro or mpileup files are given as input to any command (proview included) these files can be merged for analysis (e.g “mapgd proview -i \*.mpileup” prints a merged pro file to the standard out).
 
<b> .map files </b> A standard for the output of the estimation commands (ei and ep) is evolving, and has been temporarily dubbed '.map'. This file is intended for the storage of any population level statistics, such as test statistics for polymorphism and Hardy-Weinberg disequilibrium, as well as a small number of statistics which may prove useful for filtering variants, such as sequencing error rate and population depth of coverage.

<b> The output of ep commands: </b> Columns 1 and 2 are site identifiers (ID1 and ID2); 3 and 4 designate major and minor nucleotides (major and minor); 
For each population in the sample four columns are printed : a major allele frequency (freq_P), test statistic for polymorphism (ll_poly), test statistic for fixed for the minor allele (ll_fixed), and coverage;
The final coloumn is the maximum likelihood estimate of the error rate (Error).

Under the assumption of a chi-square distribution for the test statistic with one degree of freedom, significance at the 0.05, 0.01, 0.001 levels requires that the likelihood-ratio test statistic exceed 3.841, 6.635, and 10.827, respectively. 

In principle, the 95% support interval can be obtained by determining the changes in the estimate of the minor allele frequency in both directions required to reduce the log likelihood by the appropriate chi-square value (e.g., 3.841) although this is not currently implemented. 

By default the program prints information to the file "dataout.txt" and this file will appear in the same location as the program. If an alternative file name is desired simply type if "mapgd -o FILENAME" where FILENAME is the name of your output file.

<b> The output of cp: </b> Columns 1 and 2 are site identifiers (ID1 and ID2); 3 and 4 designate major and minor nucleotides (major and minor);
For each population two columns are printed : The maximum likelihood estimate of the major allele frequency in that population (freq_P), and the test statistic whether this frequency differes from the average frequency across all samples;

The final two columns are the major allele frequency in the metapopulation (meta_P) and the maximum likelihood estimate of the error rate (Error). Output columns are tab delimited.

By default the program prints information to the file "dataout.txt" and this file will appear in the same location as the program. If an alternative file name is desired simply type if "mapgd -o FILENAME" where FILENAME is the name of your output file.

<b> The output of ei: </b> Columns 1 and 2 are site identifiers (ID1 and ID2); 3 and 4 designate major and minor nucleotides (major and minor); 
For each population in the sample four columns are printed : a major allele frequency (freq_P), test statistic for polymorphism (ll_poly), test statistic for fixed for the minor allele (ll_fixed), and coverage;
The final coloumn is the maximum likelihood estimate of the error rate (Error).

Under the assumption of a chi-square distribution for the test statistic with one degree of freedom, significance at the 0.05, 0.01, 0.001 levels requires that the likelihood-ratio test statistic exceed 3.841, 6.635, and 10.827, respectively. 

In principle, the 95% support interval can be obtained by determining the changes in the estimate of the minor allele frequency in both directions required to reduce the log likelihood by the appropriate chi-square value (e.g., 3.841) although this is not currently implemented. 

By default the program prints information to the file "dataout.txt" and this file will appear in the same location as the program. If an alternative file name is desired simply type if "mapgd -o FILENAME" where FILENAME is the name of your output file.

<b> .gcf files </b> Again, this format is actively being developed, but .gcf files are intended to serve as a close analog of vcf files, with the only intentional difference being the storage of genotpyic likelihoods as floating point numbers.

<h4> Python extras </h4>

<h5> mapgdutils.py </h5>The script mapgdutils.py is a stop gap measure used to generate genotypic likelihoods (i.e. gcf files) for the analysis of the relatedness of a pair of individuals. A script of this name is likely to persist in future version of the program to perform computationally simple task that may be useful; however, we hope to generation genotypic likelihoods directly in mapgd in the near future.

<h6> pedigreecalc.py </h6>A simple script to predict the coefficients of IBD from merlin formated pedigree files.

<h6> SciEst.py </h6> A script to esimate the IBD coefficients of pairs of individuals from the '.gcf' files generated by mapgduils.py

<h6> simulatempileup.py </h6> A script that generates raw reads from a population and a reference file. This script was used to compare the performance of mapgd with similar programs. 
  
<h5> Making the Input File </h5>

Currently mapgd allows for the estimation of allele frequencies in individually labeled and pooled population sequence through the “ei” and "ep" command respectively, the comparison of allele frequencies between two populations with the "cp" command,  the conversion of mpileups to the ".pro" format though the proview command, and the estimatation of seven components of pair-wise relatedness through the "rel" command.

For example, if the sequencing center gives you two files called "seq1.fastq" and "seq2.fastq" your entire work flow might look something like this: 

<h5> Examples </h5>

First you will have to map your reads to some reference. This could be done with the program bwa by typing:
 
	bwa aln Reference.fna seq1.fastq > seq1.sai
	bwa sam Reference.fna seq1.sai seq1.fastq > seq1.sam
	samtools view -bS seq1.sam > seq1.bam
	samtools sort seq1.bam seq1.sort
	samtools index seq1.sort.bam

You would then type some similar commands to map reads from seq2 to the same reference.

Next the data have to be converted into some format the mapgd can read. Currently the easiest route to accomplish this is to create an 'mpileup' file with samtools:

	samtools mpileup -q 25 -Q 25 -B seq.sort.bam seq.sort.bam > 	population.mpileup

Then mpileup file must be converted to a .pro file which mapgd can use directly: 

	mapgd proview -i metapopulation.pileup > metapopulation.pro


Finally analysis can be run on the data. If the .pro file contains population data you might run either the ep command or the cp command:  

	mapgd ep -i metapopulation.pro -p 1 -o population1_allelfrequencies.txt
	mapgd cp -i metapopulation.pro -p 1,2 -o allelfrequency_comparison.txt

Alternatively, if the .pro file contains individual data you will want to run the ei command:

	mapgd ei -i metapopulation.pro -p 1 -o population1_allelfrequencies.txt

<h5> The above work flow using  I/O redirection </h5>
	samtools mpileup -q 25 -Q 25 -B population1.sort.bam population2.sort.bam 
	| mapgd proview | mapgd ei -p 1,2 > allelefrequency.txt

or equivalently: 

	samtools mpileup -q 25 -Q 25 -B population1.sort.bam population2.sort.bam 
	| mapgd ei -p 1,2 > allelefrequency.txt

In the case where the ei command has been used the txt files can be further analized to estimate the seven IBD coefficients. Currently The tool mapgdutils.py must be used on the reformat the results, folowed by use of the SciEst.py script:

	mapgdutils.py -l 10 -e 0.01 -c 50 -C 200 population.pro > population.gcf
	SciEst.py population.gcf

<h5> Other Useful Programs </h5>

This program is intended for use with ".pro" described in the previous section. A slightly modified version of the program sam2pro, written by Bernhard Haubold, is included in this package and can be run by typing "mapgd proview". Programs for converting other file formats to ".pro" files are available in stand alone form http://guanine.evolbio.mpg.de/mlRho/

The workflow described above requires the programs bwa and samtools.

To download bwa please visit http://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net/

To download samtools please visit http://www.htslib.org/

<h5> For windows users </h5>

The windows binaries for V 2.1 are currently unavailable. You may try to compile the source code yourself, as we have tried to refrain from using any platform specific libraries, or you can send me (Matthew) an e-mail telling me to get the binaries up ASAP. 

If the binaries did exist, you could obtain them by clicking the "Download ZIP" button. You would then be prompted to save or open the file MAPGD-master.zip. Extract this file to the directory of your choice, which should create the new directory "MAPGD-master". Open this directory in windows explorer and click on the file "RunMeWin-32.bat" if you have a 32 bit version of windows or the "RunMeWin-64.bat" if you have a 64 bit versions of windows. If you don't know what version of windows you have, then just try clicking on both. You will be prompted to enter the name of the file you wish to analyze. You can type "test\test.pileup" to analyzea  test data set. To analyze your own data, just drag and drop the file into MAPGD-master folder, click on the RunMeWin-32.bat or RunMeWin-64.bat and type the filename of the file. The output will be saved to the file output.txt.   

mapgd can also be run from the command prompt, which can be accessed pressing the Windows logo key and r key simultaneously then typing "cmd" into menu which appears.

Although mapgd can be run by windows users, bwa, samtools, or other bioinformatic programs may not be available for window users.

<h5> Linux or Mac users </h5>

After clicking the "Download ZIP" button you will be prompted to save or open the file MAPGD-master.zip. Save this this file to the directory of your choice, then go to this director in a terminal, for example /home/Foo/Downloads/

Then type:

	unzip MAPGD.zip
	cd MAPGD-master/src
	make

The program can be installed for all users of a computer by typing:

	sudo make install

Scripts for both Linux and Mac users are present in the top level directory, or the program can be run by typing "mapgd ep -i FILENAME" where FILENAME is the a .pro file.

<h3> Bigred2 </h3>

A note to IU users: Bigred2 has several different programming environments. While we hope to support use int he cray development environment in the future, currently support is only available in the gnu programming environment. To compile the code you will have to type "module rm PrgEnv-cray" then "module load PrgEnv-gnu".

<h3> Reference </h3>

Please cite the following paper (once it is written) when publishing results derived from this program:

Ackerman, M. S., P. Johri, K. Spitze and M. Lynch, 2015  A general statistical model for coefficients of relatedness and its application to the analysis of population-genomic data. In prep. 

<h4>Copyright</h4>

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public License for more details.

For a copy of the GNU General Public License write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA
